---
layout: post
title: ST558 - Reflection Blog Post
---

<i><b>What (if anything) has changed about what you think a data scientist is and what they do?</b></i>

I am not sure anything has changed about what I think a data scientist is or what they typically do, and in fact, it has more so served to solidify my initial thoughts, which I realized reading through re-reading my first two blog posts from the course this summer.  Conway's Venn Diagram of Data Science is really accurate, and that was evidenced this semester as well.  If you have good programming skills and knowledge in a subject area, along with knowledge of mathematics and statistics, you can be a really successful data scientist.  It is more than just technical knowledge though, it is an extremely applied science, where to be able to implement some of the complex procedures and design of platforms, you need to be able to translate the mathematical or statistical theory into practice.  Problems in modern society, thanks in part to the power of computing, are more and more complex to solve, yet we can build the computers, software, and code to solve them.  In terms of the debate between being a data scientist versus a statistician, I believe my original argument was correct, that the similarities outweigh the differences, but I will say more - they should be the same thing.  In modern society statisticians solving problems utilize some type of statistical software.  Therefore, to be a good statistician today you also need to be a good data scientist. Likewise, as already mentioned, data scientists need to know and understand the statistical theory in order to apply it and produce a practical real-world instantiation of it.  Thus, if our programs at universities and colleges in statistics and data science are to be successful, they will need to develop their students to be well-rounded and knowledgable in both areas.

<i><b>What your current thoughts are in terms of using R for data science - do you think you'll continue to use R going forward?  Why or why not?</b></i>  

I have to say, I think the most wonderful part about R is R Markdown. Being able to mix code and output and text and equations together with ease all in the same document is something that is truly amazing and I know I will use in the future.  I think the shiny apps serve their purpose and are also very intriguing, and I wouldn't mind spending some more time developing those (I did sign up and create a free account on the shinyapps.io and I am thinking if I use them more and create new apps I would go for a paid subscription).  I think R is very dynamic and is good for certain things.  I think the biggest thing I've learned this summer, going in depth into both R and SAS is that a good data scientist and/or statistician really needs to know multiple languages.  I still love my SPSS and write syntax for it all the time, and I can't see ever not using it.  However, depending on what type of problem I am trying to solve, R or SAS may have distinct advantages.  Also, it was more apparent in ST 555, data needs so much cleaning, and comes to you from a variety of other sources and applications.  Knowing how to deal with those datasets in a variety of software types will also support the well-roundedness of students in programs of data science and statistics.

<i><b>what things are you going to do differently in practice now that you've had this course?</b></i>  

I've already been pondering how I can make use of R in my daily practice at the medical school.  I am the resident "data man" there, a nickname given to me by our former Dean because of how my role necessitates me to be adept with a variety of data and reporting for the school.  Again, I certainly feel at the very least R Markdown will allow me to create publication ready documents with ease, so I know I will use R in that way.  But I hope after I finish my degree I will be able to utilize R more towards its potential.  Also, as already mentioned, even though for the time being SPSS still feels like my "base" language, or the one I am still most fluent/comfortable with, it has become more like a right triangle with SAS and R as the other vertices.  I hope to keep growing my skills and learning more in each of the packages so that I can be as marketable as I possibly can be.

