---
layout: post
title: ST558 - Project 1 Blog Post
---

<b>Link to Project 1 repository:</b>   <a href="https://ztvaskal.github.io/ST558Project1/">https://ztvaskal.github.io/ST558Project1/</a>

<i><b>Brief Summary of Project 1 Findings</b></i>    
Project 1 dealt with creating a vignette for reading and summarizing a JSON datasets through the National Hockey League (NHL) API.  For the first several bullet points, I feel that I learned a great deal about JSON in general, its history, development, and utility.  It makes perfect sense to learn about it in a class such as this, and I can see areas of my personal and professional life where I would want to utilize JSON, R, APIs, and GitHub much more!

After those descriptions were completed, a large amount of time was spent writing the 5 different functions to get the data from the NHL API.  These 5 functions then helped to serve as the basis for getting the data to manipulate and visually explore through the raw data, as well as through charts and graphs.

<i><b>Discussion of the Overall Process for this Project</b></i>    
The overall process consisted of me writing up responses to what JSON is and what R packages exist to use to deal with it, writing code for the functions in a separate .rmd document, because I didn't want to mess up my main README.rmd file.  The knitting to github_document was like riding a sine wave, it would knit well, then I'd some code and it wouldn't, go browse the message boards and internet, fix it, works good for a while, and then repeat the process all over again.  I also feel like I knitted to test the documents so many times - but that is most likely just me, I tend to do it quite a bit, in addition to continuously running and re-running parts of the code.  Then I would knit, commit, and push, and keep checking how it looked in on my repo page (I even splurged the $4/month for the subscription to GitHub. I really am intrigued by it, and although I have never used it (or even visited the site to check out other people's repos) before this class, I can see myself using it a lot more in the future.  So in that regard I am really thankful for this project forcing us to use it! :)

<i><b>What would I do differently?</b></i>    
I'm not sure right now what I could do differently.  This does not mean I think the process went perfectly - far from it!  I simply lack enough knowledge about GitHub, about the nuances of R and related packages and dependencies that influence the markdown files.  I do wish I could learn some code to make this "prettier."  I am very big on aesthetics in my work life, and sometimes it is hard for me to submit these projects when I am not pleased with how they look.  I do spend quite a bit of time trolling through R message boards, and blog posts, help files and documentation to try to improve the homeworks (and this project), but again I still don't know enough to be able to fix things consistently when they aren't working correctly, or even diagnose the issues to know how to try and come up with a solution.  So, I suppose if I could change anything or do something differently it would be to gain more knowledge so I could make my work more aesthetically pleasing.

<i><b>What was the most difficult part for me?</b></i>  
The most difficult aspect, in my opinion, to any programming type of assignment is the debugging process.  While I do feel like I am becomming more and more comfortable working in R, I still would not say I know it or am completely comfortable with it.  This course this summer seems like it is just flying by, and I will admit it has been extra challenging for me taking the ST555 class at the same time and learning SAS as well.  I do feel that the two are so different, in terms of actual syntax and style that at least I have not yet been mixing up the two.  Besides all of that, I also think learning the GitHub portion was challenging as well, and how to debug that process.  All in all, hopefully I will be ultimately successful on this project!

<i><b>What are your big take-aways from this project?</b></i>  
My first big take-away, and this has been hammered home in ST555 as well (not to mention I feel like it is already something I knew and have experienced far too often in my work life) is that 80-90% of the time is spent on the actual data - reading it in, setting it up, verifying it, cleaning it, etc...   Only the last 10-20% seems to be spent on the actual fun and useful portion of the process which is examining the data and drawing inferences.  I completely understand that without good data the analysis is meaningless, but I wish there was more of a balance between the two instead of 80/20.  I suppose the other big take-away is to learn how to utilize more tools such as GitHub and continue to become more well-rounded with respect to content knowledge but also technical knowledge and the development of hard-skills such as programming in R!  You were right Dr. Post, I am loving R and I am debating about not going back to SPSS!  Still have though (out of necessity).  But maybe after this class is over! 
