---
layout: post
title: ST558 - Programming in R
---
<i><b>Everyone in this course had some programming experience coming in (due to the prerequisites).  What are your thoughts on R vs whatever other software you've used?</b></i>    

This question really got me reminiscing back to my teenage years when I first started programming in Pascal and C++ in 9th and 10th grade (I'm sure I could dig up some floppies that have some code saved on them, but I have no way to read them!) and the path which led me to the present day, where taking summer courses like ST 555 - Statistical Programming I and ST 558 - Data Science for Statisticians, has rekindled my love for programming.  One of my co-workers mentioned to me, just a few days ago, that she has never seen me this happy, motivated, and dedicated to my coursework.  It's not her fault she never got to see the old me, the Zack who loved programming so much he attempted double majoring in math and computer science, until I hit operating systems my junior year and decided to cop out with just a minor, but picked up a minor in physics to compensate.  What I didn't know then, that is so completely evident now, is that I have an applied heart.  Theory is beautiful and awe-inspiring.  It astonishes me how these brilliant minds across various fields and disciplines could discover such truths, in often unique and never-before-seen ways.  All that is great, but give me a question to solve and some data, something to make an impact in someone else's life to help them succeed, a way that I can apply this theory with practicality and ingenuity in a different way, and then I am excited.

So, besides Pascal and C++ in high school, most of my undergrad programming was in C++ and Unix.  I'll never forget that 1 credit class in Unix that encompasses more hours of my time and effort than most of my 3 credit class.  For my graduate work and master's degree, I've used R and Matlab.  I've dabbled in SAS before, and have done even more so far this summer, however, the statistical program of choice for almost all of my professional work life has been IBM's SPSS software, dating back all the way to v.11.0. (we're on 26.0 now if that tells you anything).  The flexible nature of SPSS to allow for speedy analyses to be conducted using a GUI has always been the biggest draw for me.  My professional life revolves around assessment and data, and using it to make decisions and guide curriculum and programs.  I wish I had more time to sit and write code, and I do quite often write syntax in SPSS to run analyses, especially for processes that are repeated annually.  So in that sense, SPSS to me is the best of both worlds - GUI and Syntax.  

But I am developing a love for R.  The R Studio environment, and specifically the R Markdown component and the ability to produce such aesthetically pleasing pdfs is something that should not go unsaid.  If we were doing a SWOT Analysis for R, that certainly would be a Strength.  The possibilities are endless with R.  It might as well stand for Raw, because you don't have much there visually, especially compared to SPSS.  But what you do have are endless possibilites.  The chance to write your own functions and code and do things that you could never really replicate in something like SPSS.  And I am sure this is me thinking with my Executive Director's hat on, but the aesthetics for R Markdown knitting to pdf cannot be overstated.  I cannot wait to produce some reports for CUSOM using this functionality.

<i><b>What functionality do you like about R?</b></i>    

Did I mention R Markdown and knitting to pdfs?  In case I didn't let me say it again!  But in all honesty R is a different experience than any of the other programs.  You are in the driver's seat of a very powerful tool, but you have to know how to use it.  Being able to develop your own functions, and use them across data files and sources is a great feature, and in this area, easily outclasses SPSS.  Not to mention it is open-source, a benefit over SPSS in terms of the cost, but a benefit also in that many end users have developed packages that can be shared and used.  While this may also be a bit of a drawback to some, I believe this is a huge benefit.


<i><b>What parts do you miss about your other language?</b></i>    

For the tasks we are doing in ST 558 right now, there is not really a good reason to miss SPSS.  Again, in the area of dynamically creating functions and producing very clean and aesthetically pleasing pdf files, R totally outclasses SPSS.  I do, however, envsion while working with large datasets, not being able to see all of the data and have it visibly present in front of you, along with the lack of a GUI interface to quickly process commands and run analyses could be potential drawbacks.


<i><b>Do you consider R a difficult language to learn? (If you knew R prior to the course, describe your experience when first learning it.)</b></i>  

I will say that the assignments in ST 558 (and ST 501 surprisingly) have been challenging, but in a totally good and doable sort of way.  It is most likely just the fact that I am rusty with programming in general, since it's been almost a decade since I've last used R.  But it has felt incredible submitting these first few assignments and being pleased with how they have turned out so far.  Another big benefit here is that R is open source.  So quick web searches when you get stuck often yield information about what procedures might be helpful, or what reason there might be for the error message that you are seeing.  

My first experience with R was a little over 9 years ago in my STAT 454 Statistical Methodology course, where we used R (not R Studio - so no nice R Markdown) to complete problems from Rosner's 6th edition textbook on Biostatistics.  We learning how to run t-tests, ANOVAs, chi-square tests for independence, etc...  Once you spend enough time in the environment and familiarize yourself with the basic code, it becomes easier and easier, just like a real language.  It's as hard as you make it! Certainly there are numerous resources available to assist when struggling.
